Chapter 2
About half way between West Egg and New York
the motor road hastily joins the railroad
and runs beside it for a quarter of a mile,
so as to shrink away from a certain desolate
area of land. This is a valley of ashes — a
fantastic farm where ashes grow like wheat
into ridges and hills and grotesque gardens;
where ashes take the forms of houses and chimneys
and rising smoke and, finally, with a transcendent
effort, of men who move dimly and already
crumbling through the powdery air. Occasionally
a line of gray cars crawls along an invisible
track, gives out a ghastly creak, and comes
to rest, and immediately the ash-gray men
swarm up with leaden spades and stir up an
impenetrable cloud, which screens their obscure
operations from your sight. But above the
gray land and the spasms of bleak dust which
drift endlessly over it, you perceive, after
a moment, the eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg.
The eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg are blue
and gigantic — their irises are one yard
high. They look out of no face, but, instead,
from a pair of enormous yellow spectacles
which pass over a nonexistent nose. Evidently
some wild wag of an oculist set them there
to fatten his practice in the borough of Queens,
and then sank down himself into eternal blindness,
or forgot them and moved away. But his eyes,
dimmed a little by many paintless days, under
sun and rain, brood on over the solemn dumping
ground.
The valley of ashes is bounded on one side
by a small foul river, and, when the drawbridge
is up to let barges through, the passengers
on waiting trains can stare at the dismal
scene for as long as half an hour. There is
always a halt there of at least a minute,
and it was because of this that I first met
Tom Buchanan’s mistress.
The fact that he had one was insisted upon
wherever he was known. His acquaintances resented
the fact that he turned up in popular restaurants
with her and, leaving her at a table, sauntered
about, chatting with whomsoever he knew. Though
I was curious to see her, I had no desire
to meet her — but I did. I went up to New
York with Tom on the train one afternoon,
and when we stopped by the ashheaps he jumped
to his feet and, taking hold of my elbow,
literally forced me from the car.
“We’re getting off,” he insisted. “I
want you to meet my girl.”
I think he’d tanked up a good deal at luncheon,
and his determination to have my company bordered
on violence. The supercilious assumption was
that on Sunday afternoon I had nothing better
to do.
I followed him over a low whitewashed railroad
fence, and we walked back a hundred yards
along the road under Doctor Eckleburg’s
persistent stare. The only building in sight
was a small block of yellow brick sitting
on the edge of the waste land, a sort of compact
Main Street ministering to it, and contiguous
to absolutely nothing. One of the three shops
it contained was for rent and another was
an all-night restaurant, approached by a trail
of ashes; the third was a garage — Repairs.
George B. Wilson. Cars bought and sold. — and
I followed Tom inside.
The interior was unprosperous and bare; the
only car visible was the dust-covered wreck
of a Ford which crouched in a dim corner.
It had occurred to me that this shadow of
a garage must be a blind, and that sumptuous
and romantic apartments were concealed overhead,
when the proprietor himself appeared in the
door of an office, wiping his hands on a piece
of waste. He was a blond, spiritless man,
anaemic, and faintly handsome. When he saw
us a damp gleam of hope sprang into his light
blue eyes.
“Hello, Wilson, old man,” said Tom, slapping
him jovially on the shoulder. “How’s business?”
“I can’t complain,” answered Wilson
unconvincingly. “When are you going to sell
me that car?”
“Next week; I’ve got my man working on
it now.”
“Works pretty slow, don’t he?”
“No, he doesn’t,” said Tom coldly. “And
if you feel that way about it, maybe I’d
better sell it somewhere else after all.”
“I don’t mean that,” explained Wilson
quickly. “I just meant ——”
His voice faded off and Tom glanced impatiently
around the garage. Then I heard footsteps
on a stairs, and in a moment the thickish
figure of a woman blocked out the light from
the office door. She was in the middle thirties,
and faintly stout, but she carried her surplus
flesh sensuously as some women can. Her face,
above a spotted dress of dark blue crepe-de-chine,
contained no facet or gleam of beauty, but
there was an immediately perceptible vitality
about her as if the nerves of her body were
continually smouldering. She smiled slowly
and, walking through her husband as if he
were a ghost, shook hands with Tom, looking
him flush in the eye. Then she wet her lips,
and without turning around spoke to her husband
in a soft, coarse voice:
“Get some chairs, why don’t you, so somebody
can sit down.”
“Oh, sure,” agreed Wilson hurriedly, and
went toward the little office, mingling immediately
with the cement color of the walls. A white
ashen dust veiled his dark suit and his pale
hair as it veiled everything in the vicinity
— except his wife, who moved close to Tom.
“I want to see you,” said Tom intently.
“Get on the next train.”
“All right.”
“I’ll meet you by the news-stand on the
lower level.” She nodded and moved away
from him just as George Wilson emerged with
two chairs from his office door.
We waited for her down the road and out of
sight. It was a few days before the Fourth
of July, and a gray, scrawny Italian child
was setting torpedoes in a row along the railroad
track.
“Terrible place, isn’t it,” said Tom,
exchanging a frown with Doctor Eckleburg.
“Awful.”
“It does her good to get away.”
“Doesn’t her husband object?”
“Wilson? He thinks she goes to see her sister
in New York. He’s so dumb he doesn’t know
he’s alive.”
So Tom Buchanan and his girl and I went up
together to New York — or not quite together,
for Mrs. Wilson sat discreetly in another
car. Tom deferred that much to the sensibilities
of those East Eggers who might be on the train.
She had changed her dress to a brown figured
muslin, which stretched tight over her rather
wide hips as Tom helped her to the platform
in New York. At the news-stand she bought
a copy of Town Tattle and a moving-picture
magazine, and in the station drug-store some
cold cream and a small flask of perfume. Up-stairs,
in the solemn echoing drive she let four taxicabs
drive away before she selected a new one,
lavender-colored with gray upholstery, and
in this we slid out from the mass of the station
into the glowing sunshine. But immediately
she turned sharply from the window and, leaning
forward, tapped on the front glass.
“I want to get one of those dogs,” she
said earnestly. “I want to get one for the
apartment. They’re nice to have — a dog.”
We backed up to a gray old man who bore an
absurd resemblance to John D. Rockefeller.
In a basket swung from his neck cowered a
dozen very recent puppies of an indeterminate
breed.
“What kind are they?” asked Mrs. Wilson
eagerly, as he came to the taxi-window.
“All kinds. What kind do you want, lady?”
“I’d like to get one of those police dogs;
I don’t suppose you got that kind?”
The man peered doubtfully into the basket,
plunged in his hand and drew one up, wriggling,
by the back of the neck.
“That’s no police dog,” said Tom.
“No, it’s not exactly a police dog,”
said the man with disappointment in his voice.
“It’s more of an Airedale.” He passed
his hand over the brown wash-rag of a back.
“Look at that coat. Some coat. That’s
a dog that’ll never bother you with catching
cold.”
“I think it’s cute,” said Mrs. Wilson
enthusiastically. “How much is it?”
“That dog?” He looked at it admiringly.
“That dog will cost you ten dollars.”
The Airedale — undoubtedly there was an
Airedale concerned in it somewhere, though
its feet were startlingly white — changed
hands and settled down into Mrs. Wilson’s
lap, where she fondled the weather-proof coat
with rapture.
“Is it a boy or a girl?” she asked delicately.
“That dog? That dog’s a boy.”
“It’s a bitch,” said Tom decisively.
“Here’s your money. Go and buy ten more
dogs with it.”
We drove over to Fifth Avenue, so warm and
soft, almost pastoral, on the summer Sunday
afternoon that I wouldn’t have been surprised
to see a great flock of white sheep turn the
corner.
“Hold on,” I said, “I have to leave
you here.”
“No, you don’t,” interposed Tom quickly.
“Myrtle’ll be hurt if you don’t come
up to the apartment. Won’t you, Myrtle?”
“Come on,” she urged. “I’ll telephone
my sister Catherine. She’s said to be very
beautiful by people who ought to know.”
“Well, I’d like to, but ——”
We went on, cutting back again over the Park
toward the West Hundreds. At 158th Street
the cab stopped at one slice in a long white
cake of apartment-houses. Throwing a regal
homecoming glance around the neighborhood,
Mrs. Wilson gathered up her dog and her other
purchases, and went haughtily in.
“I’m going to have the McKees come up,”
she announced as we rose in the elevator.
“And, of course, I got to call up my sister,
too.”
The apartment was on the top floor — a small
living-room, a small dining-room, a small
bedroom, and a bath. The living-room was crowded
to the doors with a set of tapestried furniture
entirely too large for it, so that to move
about was to stumble continually over scenes
of ladies swinging in the gardens of Versailles.
The only picture was an over-enlarged photograph,
apparently a hen sitting on a blurred rock.
Looked at from a distance, however, the hen
resolved itself into a bonnet, and the countenance
of a stout old lady beamed down into the room.
Several old copies of Town Tattle lay on the
table together with a copy of Simon Called
Peter, and some of the small scandal magazines
of Broadway. Mrs. Wilson was first concerned
with the dog. A reluctant elevator-boy went
for a box full of straw and some milk, to
which he added on his own initiative a tin
of large, hard dog-biscuits — one of which
decomposed apathetically in the saucer of
milk all afternoon. Meanwhile Tom brought
out a bottle of whiskey from a locked bureau
door.
I have been drunk just twice in my life, and
the second time was that afternoon; so everything
that happened has a dim, hazy cast over it,
although until after eight o’clock the apartment
was full of cheerful sun. Sitting on Tom’s
lap Mrs. Wilson called up several people on
the telephone; then there were no cigarettes,
and I went out to buy some at the drugstore
on the corner. When I came back they had disappeared,
so I sat down discreetly in the living-room
and read a chapter of Simon Called Peter — either
it was terrible stuff or the whiskey distorted
things, because it didn’t make any sense
to me.
Just as Tom and Myrtle (after the first drink
Mrs. Wilson and I called each other by our
first names) reappeared, company commenced
to arrive at the apartment-door.
The sister, Catherine, was a slender, worldly
girl of about thirty, with a solid, sticky
bob of red hair, and a complexion powdered
milky white. Her eye-brows had been plucked
and then drawn on again at a more rakish angle,
but the efforts of nature toward the restoration
of the old alignment gave a blurred air to
her face. When she moved about there was an
incessant clicking as innumerable pottery
bracelets jingled up and down upon her arms.
She came in with such a proprietary haste,
and looked around so possessively at the furniture
that I wondered if she lived here. But when
I asked her she laughed immoderately, repeated
my question aloud, and told me she lived with
a girl friend at a hotel.
Mr. McKee was a pale, feminine man from the
flat below. He had just shaved, for there
was a white spot of lather on his cheekbone,
and he was most respectful in his greeting
to every one in the room. He informed me that
he was in the “artistic game,” and I gathered
later that he was a photographer and had made
the dim enlargement of Mrs. Wilson’s mother
which hovered like an ectoplasm on the wall.
His wife was shrill, languid, handsome, and
horrible. She told me with pride that her
husband had photographed her a hundred and
twenty-seven times since they had been married.
Mrs. Wilson had changed her costume some time
before, and was now attired in an elaborate
afternoon dress of cream-colored chiffon,
which gave out a continual rustle as she swept
about the room. With the influence of the
dress her personality had also undergone a
change. The intense vitality that had been
so remarkable in the garage was converted
into impressive hauteur. Her laughter, her
gestures, her assertions became more violently
affected moment by moment, and as she expanded
the room grew smaller around her, until she
seemed to be revolving on a noisy, creaking
pivot through the smoky air.
“My dear,” she told her sister in a high,
mincing shout, “most of these fellas will
cheat you every time. All they think of is
money. I had a woman up here last week to
look at my feet, and when she gave me the
bill you’d of thought she had my appendicitis
out.”
“What was the name of the woman?” asked
Mrs. McKee.
“Mrs. Eberhardt. She goes around looking
at people’s feet in their own homes.”
“I like your dress,” remarked Mrs. McKee,
“I think it’s adorable.”
Mrs. Wilson rejected the compliment by raising
her eyebrow in disdain.
“It’s just a crazy old thing,” she said.
“I just slip it on sometimes when I don’t
care what I look like.”
“But it looks wonderful on you, if you know
what I mean,” pursued Mrs. McKee. “If
Chester could only get you in that pose I
think he could make something of it.”
We all looked in silence at Mrs. Wilson, who
removed a strand of hair from over her eyes
and looked back at us with a brilliant smile.
Mr. McKee regarded her intently with his head
on one side, and then moved his hand back
and forth slowly in front of his face.
“I should change the light,” he said after
a moment. “I’d like to bring out the modelling
of the features. And I’d try to get hold
of all the back hair.”
“I wouldn’t think of changing the light,”
cried Mrs. McKee. “I think it’s ——”
Her husband said “sh!” and we all looked
at the subject again, whereupon Tom Buchanan
yawned audibly and got to his feet.
“You McKees have something to drink,”
he said. “Get some more ice and mineral
water, Myrtle, before everybody goes to sleep.”
“I told that boy about the ice.” Myrtle
raised her eyebrows in despair at the shiftlessness
of the lower orders. “These people! You
have to keep after them all the time.”
She looked at me and laughed pointlessly.
Then she flounced over to the dog, kissed
it with ecstasy, and swept into the kitchen,
implying that a dozen chefs awaited her orders
there.
“I’ve done some nice things out on Long
Island,” asserted Mr. McKee.
Tom looked at him blankly.
“Two of them we have framed down-stairs.”
“Two what?” demanded Tom.
“Two studies. One of them I call Montauk
Point— The Gulls, and the other I call Montauk
Point— The Sea.”
The sister Catherine sat down beside me on
the couch.
“Do you live down on Long Island, too?”
she inquired.
“I live at West Egg.”
“Really? I was down there at a party about
a month ago. At a man named Gatsby’s. Do
you know him?”
“I live next door to him.”
“Well, they say he’s a nephew or a cousin
of Kaiser Wilhelm’s. That’s where all
his money comes from.”
“Really?”
She nodded.
“I’m scared of him. I’d hate to have
him get anything on me.”
This absorbing information about my neighbor
was interrupted by Mrs. McKee’s pointing
suddenly at Catherine:
“Chester, I think you could do something
with her,” she broke out, but Mr. McKee
only nodded in a bored way, and turned his
attention to Tom.
“I’d like to do more work on Long Island,
if I could get the entry. All I ask is that
they should give me a start.”
“Ask Myrtle,” said Tom, breaking into
a short shout of laughter as Mrs. Wilson entered
with a tray. “She’ll give you a letter
of introduction, won’t you Myrtle?”
“Do what?” she asked, startled.
“You’ll give McKee a letter of introduction
to your husband, so he can do some studies
of him.” His lips moved silently for a moment
as he invented. “George B. Wilson at the
Gasoline Pump, or something like that.”
Catherine leaned close to me and whispered
in my ear: “Neither of them can stand the
person they’re married to.”
“Can’t they?”
“Can’t stand them.” She looked at Myrtle
and then at Tom. “What I say is, why go
on living with them if they can’t stand
them? If I was them I’d get a divorce and
get married to each other right away.”
“Doesn’t she like Wilson either?”
The answer to this was unexpected. It came
from Myrtle, who had overheard the question,
and it was violent and obscene.
“You see,” cried Catherine triumphantly.
She lowered her voice again. “It’s really
his wife that’s keeping them apart. She’s
a Catholic, and they don’t believe in divorce.”
Daisy was not a Catholic, and I was a little
shocked at the elaborateness of the lie.
“When they do get married,” continued
Catherine, “they’re going West to live
for a while until it blows over.”
“It’d be more discreet to go to Europe.”
“Oh, do you like Europe?” she exclaimed
surprisingly. “I just got back from Monte
Carlo.”
“Really.”
“Just last year. I went over there with
another girl.” “Stay long?”
“No, we just went to Monte Carlo and back.
We went by way of Marseilles. We had over
twelve hundred dollars when we started, but
we got gypped out of it all in two days in
the private rooms. We had an awful time getting
back, I can tell you. God, how I hated that
town!”
The late afternoon sky bloomed in the window
for a moment like the blue honey of the Mediterranean
— then the shrill voice of Mrs. McKee called
me back into the room.
“I almost made a mistake, too,” she declared
vigorously. “I almost married a little kyke
who’d been after me for years. I knew he
was below me. Everybody kept saying to me:
‘Lucille, that man’s ‘way below you!’
But if I hadn’t met Chester, he’d of got
me sure.”
“Yes, but listen,” said Myrtle Wilson,
nodding her head up and down, “at least
you didn’t marry him.”
“I know I didn’t.”
“Well, I married him,” said Myrtle, ambiguously.
“And that’s the difference between your
case and mine.”
“Why did you, Myrtle?” demanded Catherine.
“Nobody forced you to.”
Myrtle considered.
“I married him because I thought he was
a gentleman,” she said finally. “I thought
he knew something about breeding, but he wasn’t
fit to lick my shoe.”
“You were crazy about him for a while,”
said Catherine.
“Crazy about him!” cried Myrtle incredulously.
“Who said I was crazy about him? I never
was any more crazy about him than I was about
that man there.”
She pointed suddenly at me, and every one
looked at me accusingly. I tried to show by
my expression that I had played no part in
her past.
“The only crazy I was was when I married
him. I knew right away I made a mistake. He
borrowed somebody’s best suit to get married
in, and never even told me about it, and the
man came after it one day when he was out.
‘oh, is that your suit?’ I said. ‘this
is the first I ever heard about it.’ But
I gave it to him and then I lay down and cried
to beat the band all afternoon.”
“She really ought to get away from him,”
resumed Catherine to me. “They’ve been
living over that garage for eleven years.
And tom’s the first sweetie she ever had.”
The bottle of whiskey — a second one — was
now in constant demand by all present, excepting
Catherine, who “felt just as good on nothing
at all.” Tom rang for the janitor and sent
him for some celebrated sandwiches, which
were a complete supper in themselves. I wanted
to get out and walk southward toward the park
through the soft twilight, but each time I
tried to go I became entangled in some wild,
strident argument which pulled me back, as
if with ropes, into my chair. Yet high over
the city our line of yellow windows must have
contributed their share of human secrecy to
the casual watcher in the darkening streets,
and I was him too, looking up and wondering.
I was within and without, simultaneously enchanted
and repelled by the inexhaustible variety
of life.
Myrtle pulled her chair close to mine, and
suddenly her warm breath poured over me the
story of her first meeting with Tom.
“It was on the two little seats facing each
other that are always the last ones left on
the train. I was going up to New York to see
my sister and spend the night. He had on a
dress suit and patent leather shoes, and I
couldn’t keep my eyes off him, but every
time he looked at me I had to pretend to be
looking at the advertisement over his head.
When we came into the station he was next
to me, and his white shirt-front pressed against
my arm, and so I told him I’d have to call
a policeman, but he knew I lied. I was so
excited that when I got into a taxi with him
I didn’t hardly know I wasn’t getting
into a subway train. All I kept thinking about,
over and over, was ‘You can’t live forever;
you can’t live forever.’”
She turned to Mrs. McKee and the room rang
full of her artificial laughter.
“My dear,” she cried, “I’m going to
give you this dress as soon as I’m through
with it. I’ve got to get another one to-morrow.
I’m going to make a list of all the things
I’ve got to get. A massage and a wave, and
a collar for the dog, and one of those cute
little ash-trays where you touch a spring,
and a wreath with a black silk bow for mother’s
grave that’ll last all summer. I got to
write down a list so I won’t forget all
the things I got to do.”
It was nine o’clock — almost immediately
afterward I looked at my watch and found it
was ten. Mr. McKee was asleep on a chair with
his fists clenched in his lap, like a photograph
of a man of action. Taking out my handkerchief
I wiped from his cheek the remains of the
spot of dried lather that had worried me all
the afternoon.
The little dog was sitting on the table looking
with blind eyes through the smoke, and from
time to time groaning faintly. People disappeared,
reappeared, made plans to go somewhere, and
then lost each other, searched for each other,
found each other a few feet away. Some time
toward midnight Tom Buchanan and Mrs. Wilson
stood face to face discussing, in impassioned
voices, whether Mrs. Wilson had any right
to mention Daisy’s name.
“Daisy! Daisy! Daisy!” shouted Mrs. Wilson.
“I’ll say it whenever I want to! Daisy!
Dai ——”
Making a short deft movement, Tom Buchanan
broke her nose with his open hand.
Then there were bloody towels upon the bath-room
floor, and women’s voices scolding, and
high over the confusion a long broken wail
of pain. Mr. McKee awoke from his doze and
started in a daze toward the door. When he
had gone half way he turned around and stared
at the scene — his wife and Catherine scolding
and consoling as they stumbled here and there
among the crowded furniture with articles
of aid, and the despairing figure on the couch,
bleeding fluently, and trying to spread a
copy of Town Tattle over the tapestry scenes
of Versailles. Then Mr. McKee turned and continued
on out the door. Taking my hat from the chandelier,
I followed.
“Come to lunch some day,” he suggested,
as we groaned down in the elevator.
“Where?”
“Anywhere.”
“Keep your hands off the lever,” snapped
the elevator boy.
“I beg your pardon,” said Mr. McKee with
dignity, “I didn’t know I was touching
it.”
“All right,” I agreed, “I’ll be glad
to.”
. . . I was standing beside his bed and he
was sitting up between the sheets, clad in
his underwear, with a great portfolio in his
hands.
“Beauty and the Beast . . . Loneliness . . . Old
Grocery Horse . . . Brook’n Bridge. . . . ”
Then I was lying half asleep in the cold lower
level of the Pennsylvania Station, staring
at the morning Tribune, and waiting for the
four o’clock train.